what if the feeling of being ashamed
being stupid is one in the same thing as
being positively motivated to try to
become intelligent you feel ashamed
about being bad and stupid and ignorant
and wrong you feel bad about being
poorly spoken unable to express your
ideas in a clearer convincing way that
feeling of shame may not be separable
from it may not be irreplaceable or X
trickable component of what we describe
in other contexts as a positive
motivation I've grown up in a culture
where I feel I'm surrounded by people at
all ages at all socio-economic levels
who simply embrace dumbing out they feel
no sense of shame in being stupid in
being ignorant in being poorly spoken
they're not afraid to appear to be an
idiot at all they embrace it our
attitudes create habits with the passage
of time and repetition our habits shape
who we really are I cannot boast that my
YouTube videos are short blunt and to
the point however I make videos that are
blunt and to the point whether or not
they're short varies a great deal with
the topic at hand we're going to discuss
scientific research in this video about
a topic that nobody reflects on
scientifically the role of shame the
role of negative motivation quote
negative emotionality was expected to
impair learning from errors by
decreasing motivation to learn jumping
ahead to the sentence highlighted in
green contrary to the prediction a
positive association was found between
negative emotionality and motivation to
learn why would this be surprising
whether we're discussing this issue
autobiographically philosophically or
scientifically why would anyone be
surprised to discover that as we used to
say shame is the mother of learning now
let's talk about the spectrum of shame
for just a moment here because some of
you may be thinking of extreme examples
of shame and some of you may be thinking
about very trivial very small-scale
examples of shame all of them have to be
considered in this examination I had a
video recently talking about drug
addiction and I quoted several people
who quit drugs and they really spoke
positively about how feeling ashamed of
themselves as drug addicts was crucial
to their gaining the motivation to live
a life of sobriety to change their lives
to give up drugs so on and so forth one
of them said specifically and movingly
that she felt ashamed to walk across the
courtroom in Chains in front of her own
mother her mother who had given her
everything her mother who had given her
so much support and educational
opportunities in life who had set her up
to succeed now she was walking in front
of her mother with her hands and feet in
Chains she was ashamed and she got
positive motivated to quit drugs I have
all my life heard similar anecdotes from
drug dealers very often people who were
experienced drug dealers said that they
didn't feel ashamed at all when they
were dealing with the police
face-to-face and you could imagine the
kind of privado
that they feel the police of their
opponents their enemies they maybe don't
feel ashamed when they're facing and the
police are facing out the jail cell but
then they have the experience of seeing
the expression on their mother's face
their grandmother's face their aunts and
uncles faces maybe their brothers and
sisters faces they see how shocked and
disappointed and ashamed their own
family members are when it's revealed
that they have been a drug dealer that
they have been arrested that they were
facing these charges and very often they
will reflect that this shame powerfully
motivated them to start a new life
junior doing
this is this is not this is not uncommon
this is frankly ubiquitous in human
experience although we can't draw up
some kind of simple rule or some sort of
got some kind of simple conclusion that
Shane gets results it's very clear to
all of us that Shane often plays a role
in motivating us to adapt to change to
learn the chain can in so many ways be a
good or positive thing over at the over
at the sort of miniscule end of the
spectrum all my life people have
perceived me as being gifted at public
speaking being a very skilled orator
being very good at face-to-face
person-to-person conversations I grew up
with a tremendous and intense sense of
shame whenever I happened to use the
wrong word in conversation whenever I
happened to stumble over my words in
conversation and nobody taught me this
it wasn't that I was ridiculed by other
children or ridiculed by my parents it
wasn't that I was given encouragement
one way or another by my teachers I felt
ashamed if I spoke poorly if I said the
wrong thing if I misused the war of any
word and I would often remember very
precisely what it was I'd said wrong and
what the ever was and I agonized over it
and I might wake up the next morning
regretting it no reason why do we
presume that speaking well and feeling
ashamed of speaking badly are two
separate things what if they are in fact
one and the same thing what if there
isn't any particular desire in me to
speak well what if there's just this
negative motivation that I don't want to
be an idiot unless I end up over years
developing myself into a more
intelligent person I've grown up in a
culture where I feel I'm surrounded by
people at all ages at all socio-economic
levels who simply embrace dumbing out
they feel no sense of shame in being
stupid in being ignorant in being poorly
spoken they're not afraid to appear to
be an idiot at all they embrace it our
attitudes create habits with the passage
of time and repetition our habits shape
who we really are people who have this
kind of shameless and relaxed attitude
to what they say what they read what
they know and they don't know fashion
themselves into shameless thoughtless
foolish people and yes there might be an
opposite extreme of someone who's very
reluctant to speak because they're so
afraid of saying the wrong thing someone
is very reluctant to commit to an
opinion because they're afraid of and
ashamed of being wrong but that self
same shame can propel you forward to do
research to cultivate an informed
opinion to become a well-spoken highly
effective highly intelligent person so
how do we come now to be in this culture
that presumes that shame is an entirely
negative thing that propels this
doctrine that nobody should feel ashamed
the fad should not be ashamed of feeling
fat the lazy should not feel ashamed of
being lazy the ignorant and the stupid
should not be ashamed of any of their
failings much less should they feel a
positive motivation to make something
better out of themselves how did that
become the predominant cultural
discourse in the 2020 and let me just
ask you do you think it can last I did
quite a lot of research on the history
of Education when I was living in China
de Hong Yin an China and I presented a
series of lectures to my students I was
teaching at a university at the time
that related to him
see there I misspoke I presented a
series of lectures to them relating and
contrasting the history of the
development of Education in Europe to
East Asia North America to England
Scotland Italy various centres of
education in the history of Europe and
asking the question how is it that a
country like the United States has
become in many ways the the unquestioned
model of what university education
should be or even what primer and great
school education should be is there is
there instead a Japanese model we should
look at the history of development of is
there instead a British model an Italian
model a French model talking about the
history of loss of education in this
pragmatic way and one of the questions I
got interested in personally and that I
involved my class in discussing it's a
series of lectures the university and
there were homework assignments and so
on why was the history of education in
Scotland so different from the history
of education in England right next door
or indeed any other major European power
one explanation that immediately
resonated with me because I myself have
experience living in Scotland when I was
a kid about 12 years old was just the
blunt statement in one of the books I
was reading on this that the Scottish
had during those centuries an intense
culture of shame surrounding personal
ignorance and lack of reading and that
more important than the particular
arrangement of classes in the school
system specific educational policies
adopted by the government was the
Scottish culture of openly revealing
people for having failed to have read a
book of making one another basically
ridiculing one another for their
ignorance which again I experienced
myself whatever it is centuries later
when I was living in Scotland and that
connected to this was the intense
Scottish culture of the book club the
books of course were much more expensive
in the past there today very often
people couldn't own books or build up a
library themselves but people would join
book clubs the book clubs would give
them all a copy of the book for two
weeks or whatever it was and
meet and discuss the book they read in a
circle they did returned the book to the
book club
there also by the way were book clubs
where one or two actors would read the
book aloud while others listen to this a
form of reading that's much forgotten
today basically performing a book for an
audience but there was this tremendous
pressure in Scottish society for a man
in order to be a man and be taken
seriously to at all times be reading
serious books the way this was written
and the frank admission that this wasn't
something glorious inviting or pleasant
about Scottish culture but that this was
in fact really something quite bitter
and nasty in Scottish culture of people
upgrading each other for their ignorance
I could immediately relate to that and
it brought back memories of Scotland and
frankly just how openly cruel and
vicious my own school teacher was in
Scotland compared to a schoolteacher in
Canada I couldn't imagine a teacher in
Canada insulting and denigrating me the
way that Scott look did and I think she
did it to just about everybody that was
also a part of their culture they had
just recently abolished beating students
with the strap and to mention this also
it wasn't purely intellectual the
shaming that went on Scotland they
forced all the boys to go to Jim
shirtless so again I was I think 11 and
at the beginning and then later 12 when
I was in Scotland so you haven't really
gone through purely lad and the the gym
instructor would openly shame the boys
who were getting fatter or more out of
shape or the boys with less muscular
development of the others so this
extended to fat shaming and body she
been in school openly so on and so forth
any kind of evaluation of the real-world
outcomes of shame including the one in
this scientific study has to address the
history of religion north and south east
and west there can be no doubt the
reason why most people alive in 2020 and
definitely most people on the left wing
presume that shame is something
completely counterproductive and
negative in our lives the reason for
this assumption is that the Christian
religion attached shame to myriad things
that are completely unproductive to be
ashamed of them now this is going to get
more difficult to deal with not less as
the 21st century goes on if you are
homosexual or if you are a lesbian
you may recognize that it's completely
counterproductive to feel ashamed of it
you know and it may nevertheless be very
difficult for you psychologically to get
to grips with your own sexual identity I
don't think that's easy I don't
however the Christian discourse of shame
that was attached to sexuality entailed
absurdities of enormous scale not just
making all homosexuals feel regretful
about their homosexuality it made all
heterosexuals feel regretful about their
heterosexuality
you know heterosexual men convincing
themselves that it's something did based
and demonic that they would ever feel
attracted to a woman other than their
lawfully wedded wife women feeling it's
something to base the demonic they
should ever desire to have sex with more
than one member of the opposite sex
between their their birth and their
death of natural causes in old age like
and people really trying to hypnotize
themselves into this ideological sexual
identity now Christianity is not the
only religion we can fault here
obviously Islam and Judaism are very
much birds of a feather in this respect
I think anyone who does social science
research would recognize how profoundly
different all of the discourse
surrounding shame is when you switch to
a tear about a Buddhist culture like
Thailand or even a very peculiar mixed
Buddhist and Shinto culture like Japan
there seem to be absolutely no doubt
surrounding the assumption that a
criminal should face up the karmic
consequences of his actions and feel
ashamed that a drug addict should feel
ashamed and indeed drug addicts were
being dragged into Buddhist monasteries
and signing up for 100% shame based
programs in which the religion was
actively involved in motivating them to
go through withdrawal and so on and
motivating them to lead a life of
sobriety completely overt discourse
about what it means to be a man and how
ashamed of yourself you ought to be if
you fail to live up to this standard
basically constant mental alertness
vigilance and sobriety a shame shame
shame shame shame there is an
interesting question for the social
sciences is shame more effective than
any particular possible alternative to
shame I want to emphasize here there may
not be an alternative ashamed
philosophically we have to start by
asking as I said much earlier in this
video what if the feeling of being
ashamed being stupid is one in the same
thing as being positively motivated to
try to become intelligent you feel
ashamed about being bad and stupid and
ignorant and wrong you feel bad about
being poorly spoken unable to express
your ideas in a clearer convincing way
that feeling of shame may not be
separable from it may not be a
replaceable or ex trickable component of
what we describe in other contexts as a
positive motivation we may just be
talking about two different ways of
describing one in the same thing the
most important finding of this study is
however that virtually no research has
ever been done in this field on this
question the study includes a review of
the literature that I think is much more
important than its particular findings
and the review of the literature says
basically built into this field of study
is the assumption that negative emotions
are negative the things we call bad like
shame have bad outcomes
and couldn't possibly play a positive
role in motivating learning in
motivating positive personal change that
assumption is profoundly false
the fact that there has been almost no
research in this area I think reflects a
deep 21st century cultural impetus a
kind of willing ignorance the fact that
many of us simply don't want to know
[Music]